README.md, before:

Generic oroGen integration for drivers based on [iodrivers_base](https://github.com/rock-core/drivers-iodrivers_base)

## Usage


Your component must depend on the `drivers/orogen/iodrivers_base` package, and the driver component must subclass `iodrivers_base::Task`:

In the package's `manifest.xml`, add

~~~ xml
<depend name="drivers/orogen/iodrivers_base" />
~~~

At the top of the oroGen file, add:

~~~ ruby
using_task_library "iodrivers_base"
~~~

Then, make your task a subclass of the iodrivers_base::Task task context:

~~~ ruby
task_context "Task", subclasses: "iodrivers_base::Task" do
end
~~~

There is two things left to do:

 * __configureHook__: create the device driver, open the device and call the
   setDriver() method. The device's "name" (i.e. device file, IP for network-based access, ...) is
   provided in the io_port property. Note that it is legal for this property to
   be empty (see the next section for explanations). To ensure exception-safety of
   the configureHook, one must use iodrivers_base's ConfigureGuard guard class (example below).

~~~ cpp
setDriver(driver)
~~~

 * process the __incoming__ data in a "void processIO()" method that is going to be
   called by the base class from updateHook().

 * __cleanupHook__: the device's close() method is going to be called
   automatically by the base class. The pointer is *not* going to be deleted
   though, so you should take care of it if you want to recreate the object in
   cleanup/configure cycles.

For instance, assuming the class has a `m_driver` attribute of the Driver
subclass

~~~ cpp
std::unique_ptr<Driver> m_driver;
~~~

One could have a setup looking like:

~~~ cpp
bool Task::configureHook()
{
    unique_ptr<Driver> driver(new Driver());
    // Un-configure the device driver if the configure fails.
    // You MUST call guard.commit() once the driver is fully
    // functional (usually before the configureHook's "return true;"
    iodrivers_base::ConfigureGuard guard(this);
    if (!_io_port.get().empty())
        driver->openURI(_io_port.get());
    setDriver(driver.get());

    // This is MANDATORY and MUST be called after the setDriver but before you do
    // anything with the driver
    if (!TaskBase::configureHook())
        return false;

    // If some device configuration was needed, it must be done after the
    // setDriver and call to configureHook on TaskBase (i.e., here)

    m_driver = move(driver);
    guard.commit();
    return true;
}
void Task::processIO()
{
    mDriver->processSamples();
    _samples.write(mDriver->getOrientationSample());
}
void Task::cleanupHook()
{
    // MUST BE done first. It detaches the driver from the task
    TaskBase::cleanupHook();
    // Not strictly necessary, the driver will be deleted on the next
    // successful configureHook anyways. YMMV.
    m_driver.reset();
}
~~~

In addition, you might want to start data acquisition in the startHook and stop
it in the stopHook. Whether the acquisition start/stop should be in
startHook/stopHook or configureHook/cleanupHook is governed by the following
factor:

 * if starting/stopping acquisition is done a lot quicker than the whole device
   configuration, then do it in startHook/stopHook as you will not waste
   ressources doing acquisition while the data is not needed
 * if it is slow (some people would even say: not deterministically fast, but
   YMMV), do it in the configureHook/cleanupHook to ensure the responsiveness of
   the system when start/stop cycles are needed but reconfiguration is not needed.

By default, the standard runtime management of oroGen tasks entails that you
will have a full stop/cleanup/configure/start cycle if reconfiguration is
needed. You should therefore not care about dynamic reconfiguration in first
implementations.

## Details about the iodrivers_base::Task interface

This interface provides two means of communication between the device and the
driver.

 * direct I/O access. This is done by setting io_port to a non-empty string.
   Acceptable values for io_port if the driver uses openURI (which it should do)
   are listed in the property's documentation.
 * port-based access. In this mode, the data is flowing through the io_raw_in
   and io_raw_out ports. The transfer of data between the ports and the Driver
   object is made by the iodrivers_base::Task class.

Other properties control the behavior of the system in both modes (read
timeout) and write statistics about the I/O. Some properties are specific to one
mode, in which case this is documented in the property documentation directly.

## Unit testing components built on top of iodrivers_base::Task

The package will by default install helpers that help unit testing components
built on top of `iodrivers_base::Task` using the
[Syskit-based unit testing support](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/components/testing.html).

**Note** that, following [the Rock philosophy](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/libraries/), most
of the device driver's testing should of course be done
[at the library level](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/libraries/cpp_libraries.html).
These unit tests should be handling runtime logic that is specific to the component
integration.

To use these helpers, you need to require the helpers and include them in the
toplevel describe block:

~~~ ruby
# frozen_string_literal: true

using_task_library "iodrivers_base"
require "iodrivers_base/orogen_test_helpers"
using_task_library 'mydriver_project'

describe OroGen.mydriver_project.Task do
    include IODriversBase::OroGenTestHelpers

    run_live
end
~~~

The general workflow is to:

1. deploy the driver-under-test and save it as a `@task` instance variable
2. call `setup_iodrivers_base_with_ports`. It returns a task whose `in` port allows
   to read from the driver and `out` to write to it
3. call unit tests using this task

For instance:

~~~ ruby
before do
    @task = syskit_deploy(
        OroGen.mydriver_project.Task.deployed_as("task_under_test")
    )
    @raw_io = setup_iodrivers_base_with_ports @task
    syskit_configure_and_start(@task)
end

it "interprets a status message from the device" do
    status =
        expect_execution { syskit_write @raw_io.out_port, some_message }
        .to { have_one_new_sample @task.status_samples_port }

    # Do some checks on `status`
end
~~~

Other helpful methods are `raw_packet_to_s` and `raw_packet_from_s` which convert
a `String` to or from a `Types.iodrivers_base.RawPacket`. See [the helpers source
code](test/orogen_test_helpers.rb) for more information

Commit message:

fix: make errorHook a first-class citizen in I/O handling
The current implementation would not do anything when in runtime error states.
This commit adds the processing of driver states (error, timeout) and introduces
the errorProcessIO handler that can be overriden. By default, the handler calls
processIO.

To keep the current behaviour, all of this needs to be explicitly enabled by the
subclasses by calling setEnableRuntimeErrorProcessing()

README.md, after:

Generic oroGen integration for drivers based on [iodrivers_base](https://github.com/rock-core/drivers-iodrivers_base)

## Usage


Your component must depend on the `drivers/orogen/iodrivers_base` package, and the driver component must subclass `iodrivers_base::Task`:

In the package's `manifest.xml`, add

~~~ xml
<depend name="drivers/orogen/iodrivers_base" />
~~~

At the top of the oroGen file, add:

~~~ ruby
using_task_library "iodrivers_base"
~~~

Then, make your task a subclass of the iodrivers_base::Task task context:

~~~ ruby
task_context "Task", subclasses: "iodrivers_base::Task" do
end
~~~

There is two things left to do:

 * __configureHook__: create the device driver, open the device and call the
   setDriver() method. The device's "name" (i.e. device file, IP for network-based access, ...) is
   provided in the io_port property. Note that it is legal for this property to
   be empty (see the next section for explanations). To ensure exception-safety of
   the configureHook, one must use iodrivers_base's ConfigureGuard guard class (example below).

~~~ cpp
setDriver(driver)
~~~

 * process the __incoming__ data in a "void processIO()" method that is going to be
   called by the base class from updateHook().

 * __cleanupHook__: the device's close() method is going to be called
   automatically by the base class. The pointer is *not* going to be deleted
   though, so you should take care of it if you want to recreate the object in
   cleanup/configure cycles.

For instance, assuming the class has a `m_driver` attribute of the Driver
subclass

~~~ cpp
std::unique_ptr<Driver> m_driver;
~~~

One could have a setup looking like:

~~~ cpp
bool Task::configureHook()
{
    unique_ptr<Driver> driver(new Driver());
    // Un-configure the device driver if the configure fails.
    // You MUST call guard.commit() once the driver is fully
    // functional (usually before the configureHook's "return true;"
    iodrivers_base::ConfigureGuard guard(this);
    if (!_io_port.get().empty())
        driver->openURI(_io_port.get());
    setDriver(driver.get());

    // This is MANDATORY and MUST be called after the setDriver but before you do
    // anything with the driver
    if (!TaskBase::configureHook())
        return false;

    // If some device configuration was needed, it must be done after the
    // setDriver and call to configureHook on TaskBase (i.e., here)

    m_driver = move(driver);
    guard.commit();
    return true;
}
void Task::processIO()
{
    mDriver->processSamples();
    _samples.write(mDriver->getOrientationSample());
}
void Task::cleanupHook()
{
    // MUST BE done first. It detaches the driver from the task
    TaskBase::cleanupHook();
    // Not strictly necessary, the driver will be deleted on the next
    // successful configureHook anyways. YMMV.
    m_driver.reset();
}
~~~

In addition, you might want to start data acquisition in the startHook and stop
it in the stopHook. Whether the acquisition start/stop should be in
startHook/stopHook or configureHook/cleanupHook is governed by the following
factor:

 * if starting/stopping acquisition is done a lot quicker than the whole device
   configuration, then do it in startHook/stopHook as you will not waste
   ressources doing acquisition while the data is not needed
 * if it is slow (some people would even say: not deterministically fast, but
   YMMV), do it in the configureHook/cleanupHook to ensure the responsiveness of
   the system when start/stop cycles are needed but reconfiguration is not needed.

By default, the standard runtime management of oroGen tasks entails that you
will have a full stop/cleanup/configure/start cycle if reconfiguration is
needed. You should therefore not care about dynamic reconfiguration in first
implementations.

## Runtime Errors

While the runtime error support in oroGen components is usually seldom used, it
does have a very good use case in device drivers. The semantic of the state is
that of a "degraded state" (with the actual state the component is in definining
how the component's function is actually degraded).

In the case of devices, it can be used when the primary function of the device
is not available - for instance for reason of safety, or the presence of an
alarm, but we need the driver to run to know whether the cause of the
malfunction disappears. Examples:

- a device using subsea transducers (e.g. sonar, USBL) is not in water, but we
  need the device's status to know whether it is in the water.
- a motor gets into an overtemperature failure mode, but we need the motor
  feedback to know it gets out of this mode.

`iodrivers_base` originally did *not* have any support for this kind of states.
Therefore, for backward compatibility reasons, the support needs to be enabled
in C++ by calling `setRuntimeErrorIOProcessing(true)` (e.g. in the constructor)

Once this is done, the common expected driver-related error handling will be
enabled (output of I/O status, handling of FD errors and of `io_wait_timeout`).
IO processing has its own hook called `errorProcessIO`. But in this case, a
default implementation exists, which calls `processIO`.

## Details about the iodrivers_base::Task interface

This interface provides two means of communication between the device and the
driver.

 * direct I/O access. This is done by setting io_port to a non-empty string.
   Acceptable values for io_port if the driver uses openURI (which it should do)
   are listed in the property's documentation.
 * port-based access. In this mode, the data is flowing through the io_raw_in
   and io_raw_out ports. The transfer of data between the ports and the Driver
   object is made by the iodrivers_base::Task class.

Other properties control the behavior of the system in both modes (read
timeout) and write statistics about the I/O. Some properties are specific to one
mode, in which case this is documented in the property documentation directly.

## Unit testing components built on top of iodrivers_base::Task

The package will by default install helpers that help unit testing components
built on top of `iodrivers_base::Task` using the
[Syskit-based unit testing support](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/components/testing.html).

**Note** that, following [the Rock philosophy](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/libraries/), most
of the device driver's testing should of course be done
[at the library level](https://www.rock-robotics.org/rock-and-syskit/libraries/cpp_libraries.html).
These unit tests should be handling runtime logic that is specific to the component
integration.

To use these helpers, you need to require the helpers and include them in the
toplevel describe block:

~~~ ruby
# frozen_string_literal: true

using_task_library "iodrivers_base"
require "iodrivers_base/orogen_test_helpers"
using_task_library 'mydriver_project'

describe OroGen.mydriver_project.Task do
    include IODriversBase::OroGenTestHelpers

    run_live
end
~~~

The general workflow is to:

1. deploy the driver-under-test and save it as a `@task` instance variable
2. call `setup_iodrivers_base_with_ports`. It returns a task whose `in` port allows
   to read from the driver and `out` to write to it
3. call unit tests using this task

For instance:

~~~ ruby
before do
    @task = syskit_deploy(
        OroGen.mydriver_project.Task.deployed_as("task_under_test")
    )
    @raw_io = setup_iodrivers_base_with_ports @task
    syskit_configure_and_start(@task)
end

it "interprets a status message from the device" do
    status =
        expect_execution { syskit_write @raw_io.out_port, some_message }
        .to { have_one_new_sample @task.status_samples_port }

    # Do some checks on `status`
end
~~~

Other helpful methods are `raw_packet_to_s` and `raw_packet_from_s` which convert
a `String` to or from a `Types.iodrivers_base.RawPacket`. See [the helpers source
code](test/orogen_test_helpers.rb) for more information
